---
hide:
  - footer
---

# Acorn Collection Protocol
###### Authors: Cavender-Bares Lab; Updated: April 2019 by Cathleen Lapadat; Associated Project: FAB-ACE

### Goals

We are a collaborative group of scientists interested in establishing a
series of common gardens with Bur Oak (Quercus macrocarpa) seedlings
across a latitudinal gradient to test for genetically based variation
among families and populations and determine the physiological
adaptations of these trees to climate.

### Numbers of acorns, trees and locations

We are aiming to collect more than 160 acorns from each of 20 mother
trees in each of four regions (Minnesota, Illinois and Oklahoma). For
each region, we need 160 x 20 = 3,200 acorns.

In each region, 20 trees should be selected from four or five different
sites, such that seeds from an individual tree are unlikely to have the
same father (&gt;20 m apart). It is important to put acorns from one
mother tree in an individual bag and label it by site and mother. At the
location of each tree, please record the geographic coordinates
(latitude and longitude); google map coordinates are sufficient. Take
photos of each tree, if possible. If you are in doubt about the identify
of the tree, please send a pressed specimen from the tree for us to
verify identification.

### How to collect acorns

Acorn viability is greatest when mature acorns are collected directly
from the tree. If they are freshly fallen, they will still be viable. If
they have been on the ground a while, they are likely to be infested and
rotting on the inside.

### Acorn storage

Collect and store acorns, if possible, in very light weight plastic
bags. These should be thin enough to allow the acorns to “breathe”.
Freezer bags tend to be too heavy. Paper is not recommended because it
will allow acorns to dry out, and they are also likely to rip with
moisture/condensation. Remove the caps of the acorns after collection to
allow aeration and prevent rotting. Acorns can be stored in the
refrigerator (~6oC) until you are ready to ship them. If you are storing
them for several weeks or more before shipping them, it helps to put
them in slightly damp sterile sand.

### Leaves for DNA extraction/Branch Specimens for Identification

Please send one or more fresh, healthy leaves from each tree for DNA
extraction in the JCB lab. These should be kept refrigerated until
shipping.

If you have time, you may also wish to send pressed specimens. To make a
pressed specimen, snip a branch with 5-10 leaves (preferably a sunlit
branch) and place it in between 2 or more sheets of newspaper (or other
paper). Use a standard herbarium press or simply pile heavy books on top
until the specimen is flattened and dry or can be bound to send. Sheets
can be trimmed to be the size of standard printer paper (8 x 10”). One
specimen from each tree would be ideal, one specimen per site would be a
good idea.

### Labeling system

Each bag should contain acorns from only one mother tree. It should be
labeled with the state, site name, species name and the tree number that
you have assigned it.

Specimens should be labeled with permanent marker using the same label.

### Shipping

To FedEx acorns, check bill recipient on the FedEx form and enter
account number 1081-3386-4. If you prefer we can email you a printable
FedEx label, if you provide us with your address and the approximate
weight of your box. Specimens can be sent via snail mail and we will
reimburse costs.

    Send to:  
    Jeannine Cavender-Bares  
    Dept. of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior  
    100 Ecology Bldg
    1987 Upper Buford Circle
    Saint Paul, MN 55108

### Questions?

    Email: Jeannine Cavender-Bares 
    at cavender@umn.edu
    612-624-6337 (office)

    or contact:
    Cathleen Lapadat
    nguye618@umn.edu
